---
title: "Note on thermal heating efficiency"
author: ["E.T. Jaynes"]
year: 2003
abstract: >
    Kelvin showed the maximum efficiency with which heat can be converted into work; but there is a dual theorem about the maximum efficiency with which heat at one temperature can be converted into heat at another temperature. It has some surprising implications, in particular that the efficiency with which we heat our buildings could in principle be improved by a large factor. This long known, but still little known, fact is of current pedagogical interest and practical importance.
categories: ["Thermodynamics"]
tags: ["heating efficiency", "Carnot engine", "heat pump", "second law"]
---
# INTRODUCTION
For over 200 years the University of Glasgow has played a uniquely important role in the development of thermodynamics. There the distinction between temperature as a measure of intensity of something, and heat as a quantity of something, was first seen clearly by Joseph Black in about 1760. This knowledge contributed to the work of his colleague, James Watt, in the first practical means of converting heat into work. Then Carnot and others tried to find the maximum theoretical efficiency of this conversion, but the one who finally succeeded was Wm. Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) at the University of Glasgow.
Recently an addition to this was made, which is not only of theoretical interest as representing in a sense the completion of the logical structure of classical thermodynamics; it has immediate practical implications. Yet the principle is hardly new; it is such a simple and immediate consequence of Thomson's work that it must have been known to Thomson in 1870.[^2] Today it cannot be really unknown to anyone familiar with the theory of heat pumps. But to the best of our knowledge it has not yet appeared in any physics textbook, stated in a form where it is seen as logically independent of Carnot engines, and forming the natural dual theorem to the one on the efficiency of Carnot engines.[^3] It seems appropriate that this way of looking at the result was finally pointed out by Robert S. Silver,[^4] the James Watt Professor (now emeritus) of the University of Glasgow.
In Sec. II we give the almost trivial derivation, and in Sec. III we point out its practical implications by numerical examples. Because a large part of the world's energy resources are actually used for heating rather than production of work, these implications are not trivial. Section IV points out another surprising application.
# THEORETICAL DERIVATION
We have a source of heat $Q_2$ which is available at Kelvin temperature $T_2$. By this we mean, as was stressed long ago by Gibbs,[^5] that the source is capable of delivering that heat to a heat reservoir which is at temperature $T_2$; $T_2$ is the highest temperature to which it can deliver that heat. If there is available a cold reservoir at temperature $T_1 < T_2$, then according to classical thermodynamics we may exploit this temperature difference to obtain work $W$. By applying the first and second laws, we obtain $W=Q_2-Q_1$, $Q_1/T_1=Q_2/T_2$; if we solve these for $W$ and $Q_1$, we have
$$ W = Q_2 \left(1-\frac{T_1}{T_2}\right), \quad Q_1 = Q_2 \frac{T_1}{T_2}, $$
with an equality if and only if the engine is reversible. In the latter case the "wasted energy"
$$ Q_1(\text{Carnot}) = Q_2\frac{T_1}{T_2} $$
is delivered as heat to the reservoir at temperature $T_1$. This is the standard result.
But now suppose that our objective is not to produce work, but to deliver the maximum possible heat to that lower temperature reservoir. This is the conversion problem faced in every home, where one has heat from a gas, oil, wood, or coal flame but wants heat at room temperature. At present, we simply allow the primary heat $Q_2$ to degrade itself directly to the lower temperature $T_1$ by passing through ducts, radiators, etc. In this way we obtain, at best (neglecting heat loss through chimneys) the amount of heat $Q_1(\text{direct})=Q_2$. But this process is irreversible because there is a net entropy increase $\Delta S = Q_2/T_1 - Q_2/T_2 > 0$, indicating that something has been wasted, and we can do better. The first and second laws imply that, not only in the conversion of heat to work, but also in the conversion of heat to heat, the maximum efficiency will be attained if we can carry out the process reversibly.
Suppose we have an ambient heat reservoir (the outside world) at temperature $T_0 < T_1$, and we use a perfect Carnot engine to obtain the heat $Q_1(\text{Carnot})$. Then we still have the work $W$ available, which we can use to drive a heat pump between $T_0$ and $T_1$, yielding the additional heat
$$ Q_1(\text{pump}) = \frac{T_1 W}{T_1 - T_0}. $$

If we combine Eqs. (2) and (3), we have now obtained the total heat
$$ Q_1 = Q_1(\text{Carnot}) + Q_1(\text{pump}) = Q_2 \frac{T_1(T_2-T_0)}{T_2(T_1-T_0)}, $$
and there is always a net gain, because $Q_1$ is always greater than $Q_2$ whenever $T_0<T_1<T_2$. But while we know that a reversible Carnot engine delivers the maximum attainable work, this argument does not make it obvious whether Eq. (4) is the maximum attainable heat.
Now from a theoretical standpoint it is more general and more elegant to apply the first and second laws directly to this process, as we did in Eq. (1). Because some heat $Q_0$ is removed from the outside reservoir, we must have
$$ Q_1 = Q_0 + Q_2, \quad \frac{Q_1}{T_1} \ge \frac{Q_0}{T_0} + \frac{Q_2}{T_2}. $$

By solving these equations for $Q_1$ and $Q_0$, we have
$$ Q_1 \le Q_2 \frac{T_1}{T_2} \frac{T_2-T_0}{T_1-T_0}, \quad Q_0 \le Q_2 \frac{T_0}{T_2} \frac{T_2-T_1}{T_1-T_0}, $$
where the equality holds if and only if the process is reversible. Thus we obtain automatically the same result Eq. (4), plus the statement that it is the maximum attainable heating, without invoking Carnot engines at all. It is in this simple argument that the main theoretical and pedagogical interest of this discussion lies.
# PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS
Consider heating from a primary temperature $T_2 = 1000$ K to room temperature, $T_1=25\,^{\circ}\text{C}=298$ K, with an outside temperature $T_0=0\,^{\circ}\text{C}=273$ K. Comparing our ideal $Q_1$ with the present maximum $Q_2$, we have from Eq. (6), the gain factor
$$ G = \frac{Q_1}{Q_2} = \frac{1-0.273}{1-0.916} = 8.66. $$

This seems at first glance quite startling; if we take into account that we are at present far from getting even $Q_2$ because of heat loss up chimneys, the conclusion is that it is in principle possible to heat our homes with an order of magnitude less fuel than we are now consuming.
A better idea of the numerical improvement allowed by the second law is given in Fig. 1, where we give contours of constant gain $G=Q_1/Q_2$ in the $(T_0, T_2)$ plane for $T_1=25\,^{\circ}\text{C}$, room temperature. Even in cold climates, average gains of the order of 5 are indicated. The reason for this high efficiency is that $T_0$ and $T_1$ are not very different on the Kelvin scale. With the values of inside and outside temperature assumed in Eq. (7), one Joule of work will pump
$$ T_0/(T_1 - T_0) = 10.9 $$

Joules of heat from the outside world, and deliver 11.9 Joules to the inside. Unfortunately, presently available heat pumps are far from realizing this theoretical efficiency. Silver notes that if present engines realize only half of the theoretical efficiency, then the heat pump component of $Q_1$ will be only a quarter of our calculated value.
Evidently, the development of heat pumps that approach the theoretical efficiency for small temperature differences would be of very great economic importance, and no physical law stands in the way of realizing them. It is only a matter of the ingenuity of inventors, and the one who succeeds will be one of the world's great benefactors. We suspect that the successful technology will avoid the crude mechanical pumps of our present realizations, perhaps depending on thermoelectric or electrochemical means that avoid all mechanical moving parts, although perhaps with circulating fluids.
**[FIGURE 1: Contours of constant gain in the $(T_0, T_2)$ plane, for $T_1=25^{\circ}\text{C}$.]**
# FREE OVENS FOR ESKIMOS
Note that the derivation of Eq. (6) is general in that it holds for any exchange of heat between three reservoirs whatever the relative temperatures and the signs of the $Q_i$, although the arrangement of Carnot engines envisaged in our derivation of Eq. (4) would no longer apply. But this seems to contradict a common statement of the second law attributed to Kelvin that "It is impossible for heat to flow of itself from a cold reservoir to a hotter one." The statement actually made by Kelvin is that it is impossible to do this *without leaving changes in external bodies*. Equation (6) demonstrates the need for this qualification for it is quite possible for heat to flow spontaneously from room temperature $T_1$ to a higher temperature $T_2$, if there is at the same time a compensating flow to a lower temperature $T_0$.
Suppose then that we want to heat an oven at the standard cooking temperature of $T_2=400\,^{\circ}\text{F}=204\,^{\circ}\text{C}=477$ K, using heat extracted from the air of a kitchen at room temperature $T_1=25\,^{\circ}\text{C}=298$ K. Our equations use the sign convention that $Q_1$ is the heat delivered to the reservoir at $T_1$, while $Q_0$ and $Q_2$ represent heat *extracted from* those at $T_0, T_2$. Therefore $Q_0, Q_1,$ and $Q_2$ are now all negative, so $(-Q_1)$ is the heat extracted from the room and $(-Q_2)$ is the resulting heat delivered to the oven; but Eq. (6) still holds. If we write the first as
$$ (-Q_2) = (-Q_1) \frac{1-T_0/T_1}{1-T_0/T_2}, $$
we see that the maximum heat that can be delivered to the oven is less than that extracted from the room, but if the outside temperature $T_0$ is low enough, the efficiency can be quite high; unlike room heating, oven heating becomes more efficient as the outside temperature is lowered.
Indeed, we have only to run a Carnot engine between $T_1$ and $T_0$ extracting the work $W=(-Q_1)(1-T_0/T_1)$, then use that to run a heat pump between $T_0$ and $T_2$, which delivers the heat $(-Q_2)=W/(1-T_0/T_2)$, in agreement with Eq. (9). If the outside temperature $T_0$ is $-40\,^{\circ}\text{F}=-40\,^{\circ}\text{C}=233$ K then according to Eq. (9), 1000 calories of heat removed from the room can deliver 426 calories to the oven. If this leaks back eventually to reheat the room, it might appear that the "cost" of running the oven was not the 1000 calories removed from the room, but only the 574 calories lost to the outside.
But this leaking back is again an irreversible process in which something is wasted, and we can do better. If the oven is well insulated, then when we are done with it the heat $(-Q_2)$ is still in it, so we have only to run those Carnot engines backward, obtaining the work $W=426(1-T_0/T_2)$ from which the heat pump can return the heat $W/(1-T_0/T_1)=1000$ calories to the room, completely restoring the *status quo*. The second law allows us to operate an oven, at whatever temperature we please, at zero cost, the outside reservoir $T_0$ serving only as a temporary repository for the entropy that must be disposed of in heating the oven.[^6]
Unfortunately, the second law will not allow us to supply our cooling needs as easily; it offers free (that is, zero operating cost) ovens to eskimos, but not free air-conditioning to hottentots because they have no lower temperature reservoir to take up that entropy.
[^1]: Professor Edwin Jaynes died on 28 April 1998 and this paper was found among his unpublished works; its message remains timely. Correspondence concerning this paper can be addressed to W. T. Grandy, Jr. at wtg@uwyo.edu.
[^2]: WTG---Actually, Kelvin had realized it much earlier: W. Thomson (Lord Kelvin), "On the economy of the heating or cooling of buildings by means of currents of air," Proc. R. Philos. Soc. (Glasgow) **3**, 269--272 (1852).
[^3]: WTG---There is, however, at least one textbook that presents the principle in terms of Carnot engines: F. H. Crawford, *Heat, Thermodynamics, and Statistical Physics* (Harcourt, Brace & World, New York, 1963), pp. 217--219.
[^4]: R. S. Silver, "Reflexions sur la puissance chaleurique du feu," J. Heat Recovery Syst. **1**, 205--207 (1981).
[^5]: J. W. Gibbs, "Electrochemical thermodynamics," Report Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sci. 388 (1886); reprinted in *The Scientific Papers of J. Willard Gibbs* (Longmans, Green & Co., New York, 1906 and Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1961), pp. 406--412.
[^6]: WTG---There is still some loss in the form of the energy required to change the state of whatever was cooked, but the operating cost is zero.
