---
title: "Commentary on Two Articles by C. A. Los"
year: 1991
abstract: >
  Recently, C. A. Los has recommended that all previous methods for
  estimating linear relations from data with unknown errors be scrapped,
  and proposes to find an 'exact objective mathematical solution' that
  depends only on the data. We discuss this with the conclusions that
  (1) his criticisms of previous methods, while overly severe, make some
  important points worth noting; (2) however, his solution ignores
  relevant information and does not exist except in very special cases;
  (3) the Los solution, when it exists, may be characterized as the one
  which would be correct if we had an infinite amount of data which led
  to the same data correlation matrix; (4) methods for dealing with the
  problem which are optimal in all cases have been known for 20 years.
author:
["E.T. Jaynes"]
---
# INTRODUCTION {#introduction .unnumbered} 
The problem of estimating linear relations from a scatter plot of data
with unknown errors has been discussed, in one form or another, by
physicists, astronomers, mathematicians, statisticians, economists,
biologists, and psychologists, since at least the time of Gauss (1809). 
What is for all practical purposes the correct general solution has been
available for 20 years [^1], but conceptual misunderstandings have
prevented some from recognizing it as the solution, and attempts to
solve it by other means still persist.

In two recent articles, C. A. Los [^2], [^3] has proposed a radical
new approach, which starts by rejecting all previous methods (least
squares, maximum likelihood, principal components, Bayes' theorem, etc.)
by which these problems have been solved in the past, on the grounds
that they are 'subjective' and 'prejudiced'. Repeatedly, his own
proposal is called 'exact'. In our view, the work
does contain some valid criticisms which could lead to better practice
in the future, so it is worth while to examine it in some detail.

The most general problem considered is that where we have $T$
observations of an $n$ component vector, thus a $(T \times n)$ matrix
$X$ of data values. The object is to see whether there is evidence for
$q$ linear relations between the variables, of the form $X\beta = 0$,
where $\beta$ is an $(n \times q)$ matrix of rank $q$, and
$0 \le q \le n$.

In conventional approaches one does this by assuming such a relation
(that is, adopting a model with prescribed $q$), not as a 'subjective
prejudice', but as a tentative working hypothesis, then finding the
resulting 'best' estimates of $q$ and $\beta$, as the values for which
one achieves the best fit to the data. As Los stresses, this is usually
done in a way which implies an assumption that some elements of $X$ are
known exactly (we agree that this is often done without justification;
but see it as a misuse, rather than a defect, of the underlying
principle). It is essential to get also an indication of the accuracy of
the estimates, since this is the basis for judging whether the model may
lead to useful predictions.

In the scheme of Los none of this is permitted; the concepts of a
'model' and a 'sampling distribution' are rejected and it is required
that we determine $q$ and $\beta$ directly from the data. Since his
determinations are called 'exact' there is no mention of their accuracy.
To fix ideas, we note first the specific example which he considers,
then proceed to the general problem.

# THE EXAMPLE {#the-example .unnumbered} 
Los reports that the data refer to the year 1985 and $T = 32$ Bank
holding companies; $x_{t1}$ is the net interest margin of the t'th
company, $x_{t2}$ is "the consumer loans in percent of total loans to
the U.S. addresses"; $x_{t3}$ is "the net purchases funds in percent
of total assets." The raw data, with other explanatory remarks, are
presented in [^3], Appendix A. Then he gives the $(3 \times 3)$ data
covariance matrix $$\Sigma = X^\prime X =
\begin{pmatrix}
0.7022 & 6.9040 & -10.6826 \\\\
6.9040 & 99.0556 & -114.7687 \\\\
-10.6826 & -114.7687 & 259.2516
\end{pmatrix} \tag{1}$$

His matrix $X$ is not the actual data, but those data
with mean values over $t$ subtracted off; i.e. denoting the raw data
values by $D_{ti}$, we have $X_{ti} = D_{ti} - T^{-1} \sum_t D_{ti}$.
Los takes it for granted without discussion, that $\Sigma$ "contains the
information needed for all computations." This implies that he will
come to the same conclusions whether that covariance matrix was
generated by three data points or three million.

Suppose we were forced to operate under the Los restrictions; then what
could we do with this problem? Since all properties of a real symmetric
matrix can be found, and visualized intuitively, from its principal axes
and eigenvalues, it must be true that everything we can infer is
contained in the diagonalization of (1). We find that the
diagonalization $\Sigma = U \Lambda U^\prime$ is achieved by the components:
$$\Lambda =
\begin{pmatrix}
.163573 & 0 & 0 \\\\
0 & 39.23379 & 0 \\\\
0 & 0 & 319.6120
\end{pmatrix}, 
\quad
U = 
\begin{pmatrix}
0.998756 & .030199 & -.039681 \\\\
-.045142 & .885617 & -.462218 \\\\
.021184 & .463434 & .885878
\end{pmatrix} \tag{2}$$

$U$ is a real orthogonal matrix, so its columns are the
normalized eigenvectors of $\Sigma$. The data concentration ellipsoid
(locus of vectors $x$ satisfying $x^\prime \Sigma^{-1} x = 1$) has semi-axes
(0.4, 6.3, 17.9), oriented parallel to those eigenvectors.

Los demands that we choose our linear relations solely from (2) without
making any use of what we may know about the measurement errors in the
three directions, or other relevant evidence.

But even under these handicaps, we can still ask for small residuals; we
observe that the component of data parallel to the first eigenvector
(the one with the smallest eigenvalue)
$$u_t = 0.999 x_{t1} - 0.045 x_{t2} + 0.021 x_{t3} \tag{3}$$

has by construction
the mean value zero, and shows a smaller mean-square variation across
$t$ than does any other component; so in this state of self-imposed
ignorance about the nature of the problem, we can do little else than to
conclude that the linear relation most strongly indicated by the data
alone is $u_t = 0$; i.e., we estimate $\beta$ as the first column of
$U$. Of course, if we knew that the measurement errors in $x_1$ were
only about a tenth as great as those in $x_2$, common sense would lead
us to a different conclusion; but Los denies us the use of such
information.

If we want to find two relations, it seems that we can do little else
than take $\beta$ as the first two columns of $U$. In that case (i.e. if
one believes that these data give good evidence for the presence of two
linear relations), the explained part of the data would be orthogonal to
the first two columns, thus parallel to the third column of (2); indeed,
this component accounts for nearly 90% of the total data variance. Let
us call this the Simple Solution; we do not see how it is possible to do
any better than this under the constraints imposed by Los, so it will be
interesting to compare the Simple Solution with the Los solution.

# CRITICISM {#criticism .unnumbered} 
But these results are quite arbitrary; with noisy data one cannot judge
linear relations merely from $\Sigma$ because it depends on our units.
For example, suppose we expressed interest rates in hundredths of a
percent instead of percents. Then all values of $x_{t1}$ would be
increased by a factor of 100, and the eigenvalues and eigenvectors would
be totally different; we now find in place of (2): $$\Lambda =
\begin{pmatrix}
29.589 & 0 & 0 \\\\
0 & 95.547 & 0 \\\\
0 & 0 & 7255.17
\end{pmatrix}, 
\quad
U = 
\begin{pmatrix}
-.076403 & -.163329 & -.983609 \\\\
.987469 & .124221 & -.097330 \\\\
.138082 & -.978720 & .151790
\end{pmatrix} \tag{4}$$

and if we are not permitted to use the knowledge that
the measurement errors in $x_1$ are now 100 times greater than before,
the linear relation 'most strongly indicated' would correspond to the
first column of the new $U$, almost orthogonal to the first estimate
(3). Likewise, the new Simple Solution is nearly orthogonal to the old
one.

But if our variables have different physical natures, there is no unique
"correct" system of units. For example, in a different problem $x_1$
might be acres planted, $x_2$ tons shipped, and $x_3$ dollars received,
for $T$ different farms. But the same data could be represented equally
well in terms of hectares, bushels, and drachma. Then the data
concentration ellipsoid would be quite different, but any rational
method of inference ought to lead us to the same substantive
conclusions.

Conventional methods of inference achieve this necessary invariance by
using sampling distributions; any change in the units of measurement is
reflected by a change in the sampling variance that automatically
compensates for it. Common sense might tell us that it is not the
absolute size of the data covariance, but the data covariance in
comparison with the sampling variances that is relevant to inference;
then we reach the same substantive conclusions whatever units of
measurement we choose. By rejecting all use of sampling distributions,
Los denies himself this way of correcting the arbitrariness; but there
are other ways.

Los also rejects the practice of using correlation functions instead of
covariance functions, on the grounds that this is a nonlinear
transformation that 'introduces distortions of the true covariation'.
Our position is just the opposite; since correlation functions, being
dimensionless, are
independent of the system of units, their use is another way of
correcting the arbitrary distortions present in covariance functions. So
he also denies himself this way of achieving invariance.

These considerations make it clear that we started with an ill-posed
(mathematically under-determined) problem. Given only the data, or the
data covariance matrix, many different linear relations are equally
compatible with them, and there is nothing to guide our choice. Even the
criterion of smallness of the residuals leads to arbitrary results, as
we have just seen. The difficulty here is that, if our variables have
different physical dimensions, then the idea of 'small' residuals is
basically meaningless; if the residuals $r_1, r_2$ have different
physical meanings, then in writing $r_1^2 + r_2^2$ we are trying to add
apples and oranges. Put differently, the data space is not a metric
space, but an affine space; there is no meaning to such geometrical
notions as 'distance' and 'perpendicular'.

There can be no defensible solution until the data are supplemented by
additional information about the nature of the problem. What we know
about the meaning of the variables and their measurement errors is
crucially important, as the comparison of (2) and (4) shows. Likewise,
prior information may tell us whether there is any rational reason for
expecting a relation between the variables, and previous data may give
us prior estimates of their parameters, which can improve the accuracy
of the new estimates.

Los rejects all such information, and so he will be obliged, inevitably,
to invoke arbitrary conditions in order to get any solution. But if all
the conditions usually used, which express our information about
relevant properties of the real problem, are to be dismissed as
'prejudice', then what epithet shall we apply to conditions which do not
express any such information?

# THE GENERAL PROBLEM {#the-general-problem .unnumbered} 
In the Los formulation, the goal is to separate the reduced data matrix
$X$ into an 'exact' or 'explained' component $\hat{X}$ of interest (for
example, vectors orthogonal to the above $u_t$), and another component
$\tilde{X}$ variously termed 'inexact', 'unexplained', 'noise', 'error',
or 'residual'. Only linear relations are permitted, by imposing a
condition $$A \hat{X}^\prime = 0 \tag{5}$$

where $A$ is a $(q \times n)$ matrix of
rank $q$. Note that if we partition off the first $q$ columns by writing
$A = (I | -\beta^\prime)$ and $\hat{X} = (y|X_2)$, then (5) takes the more
familiar form $X_2 \beta = y$. From (5) he then obtains
$$A \hat{X}^\prime \hat{X} = A \hat{\Sigma} = 0 \tag{6}$$

where $\hat{\Sigma}$
is the reduced covariance matrix. The nature of the problem facing us can be
seen at once by dealing directly with the data vectors $X$ without
introducing $\Sigma$ at all; but Los chooses to take this detour, which
obscures that information.

Next he partitions the columns of $A$ in the aforementioned way
$A = (I | B)$ where $I$ is a $(q \times q)$ matrix and $B$ a
$q \times (n-q)$ one, and partitions $\hat{\Sigma}$ similarly:
$$\hat{\Sigma} =
\begin{pmatrix}
\hat{\Sigma}_11 & \hat{\Sigma}_12 \\\\
\hat{\Sigma}_21 & \hat{\Sigma}_22
\end{pmatrix} \tag{7}$$

where $\hat{\Sigma}_12 = \hat{\Sigma}_21'$ is a
$(q \times n)$ matrix, etc., and $\hat{\Sigma}_22$ is to have full
rank $(n-q)$. Then writing out (6) we find that $B$ is determined to be
$B = -I \hat{\Sigma}_12 \hat{\Sigma}_22^{-1}$. If we choose $I$ to
be the $(q \times q)$ unit matrix, as Los does, then (6) reduces to the
condition
$$\hat{\Sigma}_11 - \hat{\Sigma}_12 \hat{\Sigma}_22^{-1} \hat{\Sigma}_21 = 0. \tag{8}$$

When first introduced, this appears to be the principal relation that
Los proposes to use to determine his solution. Thus he describes (8) as
imposing a set of "exact, simultaneous, nonlinear equality constraints
on the variances and covariances of the reduced covariance matrix, i.e.
on the explained part of the data covariance matrix $\hat{\Sigma}$." 
Then he states that (8) poses (italics his): "a formidable intellectual
problem. A general solution has not yet been found". We are happy to
give that general solution below.

In the case $(n=3, q=2)$, [^3] devotes half a page to studying (8),
which is thought to impose complicated conditions on the solution to his
problem, noting some implied sign conditions but not finding any
specific solution. However, it is evident from inspection that in this
case (or in any case where $q = n - 1$), the missing general solution is
simply a projection operator:
$$\hat{\Sigma}_ij = a_i a_j, 
\quad
(a_1 \cdots a_n) \text{ arbitrary} \tag{9}$$

showing that (8) imposes no condition at all on the solution! By the
choice $q = n - 1$ we have already required that the 'exact' component
of the data $\hat{X}$ must be parallel to some fixed vector $a$, but (8)
allows its direction to be arbitrary. Factoring (9) we have
$\hat{X}_tj = a_j$, just what we knew before taking this detour.
For that general solution, we extend this result to any $n$ and $q$.
Since all matrix elements are real, the symmetric matrix $\hat{\Sigma}$
has $n(n+1)/2$ independent components and (8) imposes $q(q+1)/2$ conditions on them. Therefore by the 'general solution' of (8) we mean
any algorithm that enables us to write a specific solution
$\hat{\Sigma}$ as a function of
$$\frac{n(n + 1)}{2} - \frac{q(q + 1)}{2} \tag{10}$$

arbitrary real constants. To
do this, choose $\hat{\Sigma}_22$ as an arbitrary symmetric positive
definite matrix; this requires $(n - q)(n - q + 1)/2$ quantities. Then
define $\hat{\Sigma}_12$ arbitrarily; this requires $q(n-q)$ more
arbitrary quantities. Indeed,
$$\frac{(n-q)(n-q + 1)}{2} + q(n - q) = \frac{n(n + 1)}{2} - \frac{q(q + 1)}{2}$$ 
so all degrees of freedom are now specified. As the final step, then, we
need only define
$$\hat{\Sigma}_11 = \hat{\Sigma}_12 \hat{\Sigma}_22^{-1} \hat{\Sigma}_21$$ 
and we have produced that 'general solution' by construction.

But this shows that (8) is always empty; it states only what we already
knew, that the $n$-dimensional space has been partitioned into a
$q$-dimensional 'forbidden' manifold spanned by the $q$ eigenvectors
with eigenvalue zero; and the $(n-q)$-dimensional 'allowed' manifold
$\\mathcal{M}$ orthogonal to it, but it says nothing about the directions
of those subspaces. Indeed, those directions ought to depend in some way
on the data; but (8) makes no reference to the data.

The moral of this is that in order to carry out a well motivated
calculation one must be aware of what information is and is not
contained in our equations. Information is never created by mere
mathematical manipulations, but it may be destroyed by irreversible
ones. Since (8) was derived from (5), it cannot tell us anything that
was not already apparent from inspection of (5). This detour was an
attempt to extract information (restricting conditions) from an equation
which does not contain it; the basic ambiguity of the problem has not
been reduced below that indicated by (10), so the search resumes for
other conditions to impose.

# THE PROPOSED SOLUTION {#the-proposed-solution .unnumbered} 
To see the situation we are in more clearly, note that if there were no
'noise', the problem would indeed be one of exact mathematical deduction
not requiring probability theory at all; if the data obey any linear
relations, any method of solution would find them. In other words, our
uncertainty as to the existence of linear relations arises solely from
the fact that the measurement errors are unknown. In order to get that
'exact' solution demanded by Los, it is therefore a mathematical
necessity that we impose $n(n + 1)/2 - q(q + 1)/2$ exact conditions on
those measurement errors. However this is done, it requires us to assume
a great deal of information which we do not possess; how could one ever
justify any such assumption?

The difference $\tilde{\Sigma} = \Sigma - \hat{\Sigma}$ is called the
"residual covariance matrix", although it is not necessarily the
covariance matrix of the residuals. In any event, the condition he now
imposes is not that the residuals be small, but that $\tilde{\Sigma}$
shall be a diagonal matrix! Far from being able to explain a reason for
this, we are bewildered by it.

To see why, suppose that $\tilde{\Sigma}$ is actually the covariance
matrix of the residuals. For 'purely random' errors we expect the off
diagonal elements of $\tilde{\Sigma}$ to have an average magnitude of the
order of $1/\sqrt{T} = 1/\sqrt{32} \approx 1/6$ of the diagonal
elements. To require them all to be zero is to make a very strong
arbitrary assumption about the noise, which is almost certainly false,
and which must have serious consequences.

Those consequences are not hard to find; this assumption imposes
$n(n - 1)/2$ new conditions on the solution, so the number of degrees of
freedom is reduced to
$$\frac{n(n+1)}{2} - \frac{q(q+1)}{2} - \frac{n(n-1)}{2} = n - \frac{q(q+1)}{2}$$ 

Unless $q(q+1)/2 \le n$ (which Los calls "Wilson's inequality") the
originally underdetermined problem becomes overdetermined, and there is
no solution at all. Indeed, when the strict inequality holds the problem
is still underdetermined; this new condition determines a unique
(although possibly multiple) solution only when $q(q + 1) = 2n$.

To see what this implies, it is quite possible to have $n = 5$ variables
that satisfy $q = 2$ linear relations, so that the noiseless data
vectors lie in a manifold of dimension $5-2 = 3$. One can easily produce
computer simulated data that conform to this. In such a case, if the
noise level is small enough, the conventional methods that Los rejects
(least squares, maximum likelihood, Bayesian) can easily find the
correct linear relations; but the proposed solution of Los does not
exist.

The Wilson inequality means that Los has no unique solution for
$n = 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11$, and so on. Only in a few special cases
[$(n,q) = (3,2), (6,3), (10,4)$, etc.] does such a solution exist; it
is not surprising that his example is (3,2). It seems to us that at this
point he might have perceived that the Wilson inequality, far from
causing difficulty for the conventional solutions as he alleges, is what
makes his proposed solution indefensible and unusable in general.

In any event, his final solution for the current problem ([^3], Table
6) is that $\hat{\Sigma}$ is the projection operator (9) with the vector
$a^\prime = (-.80162, -8.61237, 13.32603)$. Normalized to unit length, this
vector is $\hat{a}^\prime = (-.05046, -.54210, .83880)$. Comparing with the
Simple Solution noted after (3) we see that they are nearly the same; the
Los solution is rotated from the third column of $U$ by
$\arccos(\hat{a}_i U_i3) = \arccos 0.99565 = 5.35$ degrees.

Pragmatically, we have not advanced very far from our first crude guess.
However, we must concede a surprising point: Los does manage to achieve
invariance under a change of units, in spite of the fact that he takes
no note of the need for it. Had we used the covariance matrix
corresponding to (4) instead of (1), the Los solution would have
stretched the component $a_1$ by a factor of 100, and thus would still
yield the same substantive conclusions. So, it appears that the Los
solution has one desirable property which the Simple Solution lacks.

In understanding the reason for this, we get a much clearer
characterization of the Los solution; in effect, supplying the missing
rationale for it. If our model was indeed correct (that is, it accounted
for every systematic effect present in the data) and we had the correct
values of its parameters expressed in $\hat{\Sigma}$, then the residuals
would be 'pure random noise'. As noted, we would not expect the
off-diagonal elements of $\tilde{\Sigma}$ to be zero, but they would be
as likely to be positive as negative. So if we were to accumulate more
and more data with this correct model, all elements of $\hat{\Sigma}$
and the diagonal elements of $\tilde{\Sigma}$ would grow like $T$, while
the off-diagonal elements of $\tilde{\Sigma}$ would grow like
$\sqrt{T}$. They would indeed tend to become negligible compared to the
other elements of these matrices.

Therefore we can explain the Los solution in much simpler terms: when it
exists, it is the solution that would indeed be 'exactly correct' if we
had an arbitrarily large amount of data, leading to the same covariance
matrix. Or, of course, the same matrix with all elements magnified by
any constant factor. When we have a finite amount of data, it requires
correction to take account of our uncertainty as to the noise. We
consider below the methods that would be appropriate in all cases, which
contain the Los solution as a limiting form for those special values of
$(n, q)$.

Of course, if we had perfect noiseless data, then as noted the data
concentration ellipsoid would flatten into a disk or line that
identifies the correct allowed manifold $\\mathcal{M}$ exactly without
any need for us to specify it in a model; the problem would reduce to
one of pure mathematical deduction of the kind which Los demanded, and
the Los solution, the Simple Solution - or any other method of
mathematical solution - would give the same results and achieve
automatically this invariance under a change of units. Since the Los
solution, in effect, assumes this case, it too achieves that invariance.

This still leaves us with one question: "Why does the Los solution work
only for certain special values of $n$ and $q$?" Answer: however large
$T$, the contribution of noise to the diagonal elements of $\Sigma$
never becomes negligible; and so without a sampling distribution one has
no way to separate them into 'signal' and 'noise' components. Therefore
the Los solution must seek to determine all elements of $\hat{\Sigma}$
from the off-diagonal elements of $\Sigma$. Only for these special
values of $n$ and $q$ do the off-diagonal elements contain that
information. In all other cases one must resort to a different
algorithm, which makes use of a sampling distribution.

# WHAT IS THE CORRECT METHOD? {#what-is-the-correct-method .unnumbered} 
After all these criticisms, let us now try to make some positive,
constructive remarks about such problems. If the available information
were sufficient to determine those 'exact, objective mathematical
solutions' that Los seeks, they would surely have been found by Gauss
180 years ago. The reason why these problems still cause trouble is that
they are mathematically ill-posed. When we have a finite amount of noisy
data with unknown errors, finding a linear relation is not a problem of
mathematical deduction at all; it is problem of inference.

Scientific inference is concerned necessarily, not with empty assertions
of 'objectivity' but with information processing; how to extract the
best conclusions possible from the incomplete information available to
us. Surely, the fundamental basis of scientific inference - almost a
principle of morality -- is that we should

1.  take into account all the relevant information we have, of whatever
    type,
2.  carefully avoid assuming information that we do not have.

but as we have seen, Los commits egregious violations of both of these
rules.

In contrast, Bayesian and Maximum-Entropy methods are algorithms for
information processing, uniquely determined by these rules and a few
other elementary desiderata of rationality and consistency. Both their
theoretical basis and their pragmatic success in applications are now
established by overwhelming masses of evidence, of which Los takes no
note. So let us summarize the historical development that culminated in
this.

We have seen that use of a sampling distribution, which describes our
information about the measurement errors in the variables, is essential
for any rational inference. In many simple cases the method of maximum
likelihood will then yield all the information we need.

Least squares is a special case of maximum likelihood, valid when the
sampling distribution is gaussian. When derived as it should be from
probability theory, it is always weighted least squares, the weighting
coefficients being determined by the sampling distribution. Then the
weighted sum of squares has the needed invariance under change of units,
and it interpolates between the extreme correctly criticized by Los, in
which one supposes some variables known exactly, and his opposite
extreme, in which weights are not mentioned at all (and are therefore, in
effect, equal by default).

However, sampling distributions may not contain all the information that
is relevant to the problem, and they do not provide all the technical
apparatus needed for calculations. Full power to deal with all aspects
of the real problem requires four further advances beyond maximum
likelihood:
1.  One may have highly cogent prior information about the likely linear
    relations, and prior estimates of their parameters. For example, one
    may know in advance that the sum of two variables must be nearly
    constant, simply because the agent's commission is relatively small
    (or perhaps because wheat is not wilfully created or lost in the
    transactions). It would be irrational to fail to take such knowledge
    into account in judging functional relations.
2.  One may have a sequence of data sets --- perhaps from successive
    years --- and the previous data yield good prior estimates of the
    parameters. We need some algorithm to update our estimated relations
    when new data become available, in a way that takes full account of
    all the past data. A useful example of the process is the Kalman
    filter, which we would like to refine and generalize.
3.  The real problem may have 'nuisance parameters' of no interest to
    us; indeed, regression problems may have more nuisance parameters
    than data points. Use of maximum likelihood or least squares would
    require us to fit all the parameters, interesting or not.

    Computationally, one would have to find a global maximum in a space
    of high dimensionality; and we may then find that the maximum
    occupies not a point, but a region. If nuisance parameters can be
    eliminated at the start, one may achieve orders of magnitude
    reduction in computation by estimating only the parameters of
    interest.
4.  Merely estimating the parameters of a given model is only the first
    step in a real research program; one needs also a way to judge the
    relative merits of different models, in the light of the data so
    that cumulative improvements can take place over long times.

Now all of these advances over maximum likelihood are provided
automatically and elegantly, by Bayesian methods. In particular, the
Bayesian 'errors in variables' (EVM) models, which Los dismisses as "not
fruitful to discuss" are nevertheless fruitful enough to provide the
information handling ability and computational power that all other
methods lack. The Los solution, when it exists, is the limit of the
Bayesian solution as $T \to \infty$, $\Sigma/T \to \text{const}$.
It is not our present topic to go into details of these Bayesian
solutions; we hope to present them in a later article. However, several
examples of such solutions were given long ago by Zellner [^1]. If one
will investigate the properties of those solutions, they will be found
to do every reasonable thing that one might hope for in these problems.
On very similar problems, including economic time series, the analytical
theory and many fully worked-out numerical examples to illustrate its
use in all four of the above extensions of maximum likelihood, are given
by Bretthorst [^4].

# REFERENCES {#references .unnumbered} 
[^1]: A. Zellner (1971), *An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in
    Econometrics*, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, (1971). Reprinted
    by R. E. Krieger Pub. Co., Malabar, Florida (1987); Chapter 5.

[^2]: C. A. Los (1989a), "The Prejudices of Least Squares, Principal
    Components and Common Factors Schemes", Computer Math. Applic.
    **17**, 1269-1284.

[^3]: C. A. Los (1989b), "Identificaton of a Linear System from Inexact
    Data: a Three-variable Example" Computer Math. Applic. **17**,
    1285-1304 (1989).

[^4]: G. L. Bretthorst (1988), *Bayesian Spectrum Analysis and Parameter
    Estimation*, Springer Lecture Notes in Statistics, Vol. 48.

[^5]: To be published in Volume 3 of special issues, "On
    System-theoretic Methods in Economic Modelling", S. Mittnik,
    Editor, in *Computers and Mathematics with Applications*, and
    subsequently as a monograph by Pergamon Press.
